chore(release): add a changelog for v0.5.0 (#2131)
future-proof-iot/RIOT-rs: CHANGELOG.md

<!-- next-header -->

## [0.5.0] - 2026-06-03

### Release Highlights

- Ariel OS's MSRV is now 1.95. ([#2054](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2054))
- (STM32) The built-in Ethernet MAC found on some STM32 MCUs is now supported on the currently supported development boards having an Ethernet PHY and an RJ45 socket. ([#1926](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1926))

> - "Debug logging" has been renamed to "logging" and the definitions of logging and of the debug console have been revisited: `ariel_os::log` should be used instead of `ariel_os::debug::log`, and `ariel_os::log::println!()` instead of `ariel_os::debug::println!()`, which has been removed. In addition, the `logging` laze module should now be used instead of `logging-facade` (formerly `debug-logging-facade`) when enabling or disabling logging as a whole. Panics are now always printed to the logging output. A new page about logging has been added to the book. ([#2008](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2008)) ([#2013](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2013)) ([#2030](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2030)) ([#2034](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2034))

Author: > we might want to link more than PR for the logging related entry in the highlights

@anlavandier I've added links to the other PRs; indeed sounds useful in this case.

- The `flash-dfu` laze task has been renamed to `flash-dfuse` for clarity, as it is only available on DfuSe devices, i.e., STM32 devices. ([#1986](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1986))
- (STM32) Ethernet support on STM32 MCUs is now using a stable MAC address (derived from the device identity) instead of a fixed one. ([#1942](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1942))
- The `embassy-usb` dependency, also re-exported as `ariel_os::reexports::embassy_usb`, has been updated to v0.6.0. The `usbd-hid` crate, re-exported as `ariel_os::reexports::usbd_hid`, has been updated to v0.10.0. ([#1932](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1932))

### Fixed

- `laze build run` now works properly when there are multiple binaries within a single application directory. ([#2093](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2093))
- The `esp-hal` dependency is now pinned to a specific minor version. ([#2122](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2122))

> - `defmt` has been updated to v1.1.0. Please see the upstream changelog for a list of changes. ([#2089](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2089))

Reviewer: This is in the "Fixed" section, but doesn't mention what it fixed. Right now the message feels like a "Changed".

Author: Yeah that one is debatable: some of the [changes are fixes](https://github.com/knurling-rs/defmt/blob/a87ee8e98b0eb22c802991924e31b4da84342e17/CHANGELOG.md#defmt-v110-2026-05-12), which are observable, but it also doesn't seem warranted to list them here, that's why there's a call to read the upstream changelog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `defmt` has been updated to v1.1.0, fixing some issues. Please see the upstream changelog for a list of changes. ([#2089](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2089))
```

Reviewer: I would prefer to have it mentioned that this minor patch contains fixes that the user may be interested in.

Author: Honestly I think the current phrasing is fine; "some issues" sounds very vague and it's unclear whether this also fixes issues of/through the OS, while it's really only the dependency (which users are likely to use directly anyway). Also it's `defmt`, users should be reading its changelog anyway.

Reviewer 2: Maybe make `upstream changelog` link to https://github.com/knurling-rs/defmt/blob/a87ee8e98b0eb22c802991924e31b4da84342e17/CHANGELOG.md#defmt-v110-2026-05-12

Reviewer 2: I agree "fixing some issues" is too vague. Let's keep as is.

Author: I've added the link, and updated the release date.

- The documentation now explains when to re-generate the editor configuration. ([#1980](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1980))
- (nRF91) Cellular networking over LTE-M is now supported on the nRF91 SiP series. ([#1795](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1795))
- The `sensors-debug` example now prints the time using the GNSS extension when available. ([#1965](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1965))

### Changed

- The board support table can now be scrolled horizontal and vertically in the documentation, improving the viewing experience. ([#2050](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2050))
- The `embassy-time` crate re-exported as `ariel_os::reexports::embassy_time` has been updated from v0.5.0 to v0.5.1. ([#1944](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1944))
- (CYW43) Firmware blobs required for the CYW43 chip are now provided through the `cyw43-firmware` crate, making license tracking easier. ([#1933](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1933))

### New Supported Hardware

- The Makerdiary nRF52840 MDK USB Dongle board is now supported. ([#2079](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2079))

> - The Waveshare ESP32-S3-Matrix board is now minimally supported. ([#1959](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1959))

Reviewer: What does "minimally" mean here? I feel like the word should be removed, as it looks like code can run on it as expected without any reported quirks in the PR.

Author: I think that's because the LED matrix isn't (i.e., we don't provide an abstraction for it); but we don't do the same for other boards so I've just removed "minimally" as you suggested.

<!-- next-header -->

## [0.5.0] - 2026-06-03

### Release Highlights

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe have a summary entry on the logging changes?

Author: That's what @bergzand proposed, I'll see what I can do

Author: I've merged most of the logging-related entries, and moved them to the Highlights section. I've kept the entry about the removal of `ariel_os::debug::log::defmt` in the Breaking Changes section because it is orthogonal to the refactor, uninteresting, and only relevant to users who were relying on these items (which are likely few).

Reviewer 3: My intention was to have a small paragraph above the highlights to summarize the logging changes and point users to the new docs to help them migrate

Author: I've added a mention of the new book page on logging, but I'm not sure what kind of summary you'd expect, it's already only three or four sentences.

Reviewer 3: Ah, I see the confusion. What I meant here is a paragraph (or two) of text to introduce the release and describe the high level achievements of this release. Essentially providing the info on why users would want to upgrade and what they have to keep in mind when upgrading. 

The current state is good enough for me.

Author: > What I meant here is a paragraph (or two) of text to introduce the release and describe the high level achievements of this release. Essentially providing the info on why users would want to upgrade

I see what you mean now: I'm not sure this is necessary for this release: we haven't done this for the last two releases and it's more of a potpourri of changes, so I think we would end up mostly paraphrasing the entries, except for the logging part, but that one is already pretty clear from the highlights section now I think.

Reviewer 2: Fine with the current state.

- Semihosting is now only enabled by default when probe-rs is selected as host tool during compilation. This fixes the "Unhandled interrupt" panic on Xtensa when calling `ariel_os::debug::exit()` when using `espflash`. Semihosting can be manually enabled using the `semihosting` laze module if needed. ([#1985](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1985))
- "Debug logging" has been renamed to "logging": `ariel_os::log` should be used instead of `ariel_os::debug::log`. In addition, the `ariel_os::debug::log::defmt` module has been removed entirely. The portable items from `ariel_os::log` should be used instead, or the `defmt` crate should be used directly instead if actually needed. ([#2008](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2008))
- The `flash-dfu` laze task has been renamed to `flash-dfuse` for clarity, as it is only available on DfuSe devices, i.e., STM32 devices. ([#1986](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1986))

> - The editor configuration generation task has been renamed from `vscode-config` to `editor-config vscode`. It now supports Helix and bare rust-analyzer. ([#1974](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1974))

Reviewer: This can be merged with the changes of https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1976

Author: Indeed, merged them (#1976 is therefore moved in the Breaking section)

### Fixed

- `laze build run` now works properly when there are multiple binaries within a single application directory. ([#2093](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2093))
- The `esp-hal` dependency is now pinned to a specific minor version. ([#2122](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2122))
- `defmt` has been updated to v1.1.0. Please see the upstream changelog for a list of changes. ([#2089](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2089))
- The `storage` example can now be used with both `defmt` or `log`. ([#1999](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1999))
- (STM32F042K6) Semihosting is now enabled on that MCU. ([#1996](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1996))
- It has been clarified in the book whether the `flash` and `flash-dfuse` laze tasks reboot the target. ([#1982](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1982))
- (ST NUCLEO-H755ZI-Q) The pin association of the red LED (LD3) has been fixed. ([#1973](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1973))

> - `embassy-time` is now not *always* part of the build of Ariel OS, even when it was not actually necessary. ([#1969](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1969))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `embassy-time` is no longer *always* part of the build of Ariel OS. It previously was compiled even when it was not actually necessary. ([#1969](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1969))
```
I missed the *not* on my first read and was puzzled about how this change was a fix or a good thing in general. I think that the proposed wording is clearer albeit slightly more verbose.

Author: Definitely better phrasing, thanks! Just moved "previously" between "was" and "compiled."

> - The `http-client` example now does not needlessly enable the `time` Cargo feature. ([#1950](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1950))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `http-client` example no longer needlessly enables the `time` Cargo feature. ([#1950](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1950))
```
More for consistency with the above proposed change than because I think that the previous wording was obtuse.

- (nRF91) The power consumption of the nRF91 SiP family has been improved by always initializing its modem. ([#2064](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2064))
- A configuration can now be generated for Zed and Gram to develop Ariel OS apps. ([#1976](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1976))
- (ESP32) It is now possible to access the debug interface of plain ESP32s using probe-rs. ([#2014](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2014))
- A section about using semihosting to exit from the debug console has been added to the book. ([#1988](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1988))
- The documentation now explains when to re-generate the editor configuration. ([#1980](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1980))
- (nRF91) Cellular networking over LTE-M is now supported on the nRF91 SiP series. ([#1795](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1795))
- The `sensors-debug` example now prints the time using the GNSS extension when available. ([#1965](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/1965))

### Changed

> - The board support table can now be scrolled horizontal and vertically in the documentation, to improve the viewing experience. ([#2050](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2050))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The board support table can now be scrolled horizontal and vertically in the documentation, improving the viewing experience. ([#2050](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/pull/2050))
```
